README.md, before:

<a href="https://github.com//sugarlabs/musicblocks/graphs/contributors" alt="Contributors">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/contributors/sugarlabs/musicblocks" />
</a>

<a href="#license" alt="License">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/license/sugarlabs/musicblocks" />
</a>

# Music Blocks

“_All musicians are subconsciously mathematicians._” — Monk

“_Music is a hidden arithmetic exercise of the soul, which does not
know that it is counting._” — Leibniz

Music Blocks is a _Visual Programming Language_ and collection of
_manipulative tools_ for exploring musical and mathematical concepts
in an integrative and fun way.

## Getting Started

Music Blocks is an interactive Web Application &mdash; the interaction
is done via basic mouse events like _click_, _right click_, _click and
drag_, etc. and keyboard events like _hotkey press_.  The application
is audio-visual; it produces graphics artwork and music. Here are a
couple of screenshots to give you an idea of how the application looks
like:

![alt tag](./screenshots/Screenshot-1.png)

![alt tag](./screenshots/Screenshot-2.png)

You can either visit to the website to have hands on experience about its working, from here  https://musicblocks.sugarlabs.org 
Some background on why music and programming can be found
[here](./WhyMusicBlocks.md).

**Refer to the following sections to get familiar with this application:**

- [Running Music Blocks](#RUNNING_MUSIC_BLOCKS)
- [How to set up a local server](#HOW_TO_SET_UP_A_LOCAL_SERVER)
- [Using Music Blocks](#USING_MUSIC_BLOCKS)

If you are a developer (beginner, experienced, or pro), you are very
welcome to participate in the evolution of Music Blocks.

**Refer to the following sections to get an idea:**

- [Code of Conduct](#CODEOFCONDUCT)
- [Contributing](#CONTRIBUTING)
- [Modifying Music Blocks](#MODIFYING_MUSIC_BLOCKS)
- [Reporting Bugs](#REPORTING_BUGS)

**Refer to the following for more information regarding the evolution
  of this project:**

- [Credits](#CREDITS)
- [Music Blocks in Japan](#MUSIC_BLOCKS_IN_JAPAN)

## <a name="RUNNING_MUSIC_BLOCKS"></a>Running Music Blocks

Music Blocks is available under the _GNU Affero General Public License
(AGPL) v3.0_, a free, copyleft license.

Music Blocks is designed to run in a web browser. The ideal way to run
Music Blocks is to visit the URL
[_musicblocks.sugarlabs.org_](https://musicblocks.sugarlabs.org) in
your browser — _Google Chrome_ (or _Chromium_), _Microsoft Edge_
(_Chromium-based_), _Mozilla Firefox_, and _Opera_ work best.

To run from the latest master branch (experimental), visit
[_sugarlabs.github.io/musicblocks_](https://sugarlabs.github.io/musicblocks).

## <a name="HOW_TO_SET_UP_A_LOCAL_SERVER"></a>How to set up a _local server_

Music Blocks is written using native browser technologies. The bulk of
the functionality is in vanilla _JavaScript_. This means that most of
the functionality can be accessed by launching the
[index.html](./index.html) file in the browser using
`file:///absolute/path/to/index.html`.

However, using so, some functionality will not be available. On top of
that, some web browsers (e.g., Firefox v68) have restrictions that
prevent Music Blocks from running using `file:///`.  Therefore, it is
best to launch a _local web server_ from the directory of Music
Blocks.

1. [Download](https://github.com/sugarlabs/musicblocks/archive/master.zip)
Music Blocks, or clone (`https://github.com/sugarlabs/musicblocks.git`
for _HTTPS_, or `gh repo clone sugarlabs/musicblocks` for _GitHub
CLI_), on your local machine.

2. In a terminal, `cd` to the directory where you downloaded/cloned
Music Blocks, using `cd path/to/musicblocks/`.

3. If you do not have [_Python_](https://www.python.org) installed,
you'll need to install it.  You can test for Python in a terminal
using `python`. Type `exit()` to exit Python. (Note that on some older
Linux systems, the `python3` command is not bound to python. You may
need to perform a `sudo apt install python-is-python3` on Debian-like
distros, or equivalent on others.)

4. After cloning the musicblocks repository, run

    for _Linux_ and _macOS_:

    ```bash
    python -c \"import os, sys; os.system('python -m SimpleHTTPServer 3000 --bind 127.0.0.1') if sys.version_info.major==2 else os.system('python -m http.server 3000 --bind 127.0.0.1');
    ```

    for _Windows_:

    ```bash
    py -c \"import os, sys; os.system('py -m SimpleHTTPServer 3000') if sys.version_info.major==2 else os.system('py -m http.server 3000 --bind 127.0.0.1');
    ```

    If you have `npm` installed, simply run `npm run serve` for Linux
    and macOS, and `npm run winserve` for Windows.

    **NOTE:** _Make sure you can run either `python` or `py` from your
    terminal, to launch the Python prompt._

5. You should see a message `Serving HTTP on 127.0.0.1 port 3000
(http://127.0.0.1:3000/) ...` since the HTTP Server is set to start
listening on port 3000.

6. Open your favorite browser and visit `localhost:3000` or `127.0.0.1:3000`.

**NOTE:** _Use `ctrl + c` or `cmd + c` to quit the HTTP Server to avoid
`socket.error:[Errno 48]`_.

## <a name="USING_MUSIC_BLOCKS"></a>Using Music Blocks

Once Music Blocks is running, you'll want suggestions on how to use
it. Follow [Using Music Blocks](./documentation/README.md) and [Music
Blocks Guide](./guide/README.md).

Looking for a block? Find it in the
[Palette Tables](./guide/README.md#APPENDIX_1).

## <a name="CODEOFCONDUCT"></a>Code of Conduct

The Music Blocks project adheres to the [Sugar Labs Code of
Conduct](https://github.com/sugarlabs/sugar-docs/blob/master/src/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md)

## <a name="CONTRIBUTING"></a>Contributing

Please consider contributing to the project, with your ideas, your
music, your lesson plans, your artwork, and your code.

### Special Notes

Music Blocks is being built from the ground-up, to address several
architectural problems with this run. Since Music Blocks is a fork of
Turtle Blocks JS, musical functionality was added on top of it.
However, music is fundamental to Music Blocks. Besides, the Turtle
Blocks JS started initially with handful of features and was written
without a complex architecture. As Music Blocks got built on top of
that, it got incrementally complex, but the architecture remained
simple, thus resulting in a monolith. Also, the functionality is
tightly coupled with the interface and native client API (Web API).

Keeping these problems in mind, we have considered a foundational
rebuild that will address all these issues, whilst adding buffers for
future additions. We'll also be using a more elegant tech-stack to
develop and maintain this project given its scale. After the core is
built, we'll be porting features from this application to it.

Refer to the repository
[**sugarlabs/musicblocks-2**](https://github.com/sugarlabs/musicblocks-2)
for more information about the new project &mdash; _Music Blocks 2.0_.

### Tech Stack

Music Blocks is a Web Application and is written using browser
technologies &mdash; `HTML`, `CSS` (`SCSS`), `JavaScript`, `SVG`, etc.

If you're just getting started with development, you may refer to the
following resources:

- [HTML tutorial - w3schools.com](https://www.w3schools.com/html/default.asp)
- [HTML reference - MDN Web Docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML)
- [CSS tutorial - w3schools.com](https://www.w3schools.com/css/default.asp)
- [CSS reference - MDN Web Docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS)
- [JavaScript tutorial - w3schools.com](https://www.w3schools.com/js/default.asp)
- [JavaScript reference - MDN Web Docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript)

Programmers, please follow these general [guidelines for
contributions](https://github.com/sugarlabs/sugar-docs/blob/master/src/contributing.md).

### New Contributors

Use the
[discussions](https://github.com/sugarlabs/musicblocks/discussions)
tab at the top of the repository to:

- Ask questions you’re wondering about.
- Share ideas.
- Engage with other community members.

Feel free. But, please don't spam :p.

### Keep in Mind

1. Your contributions need not necessarily have to address any
discovered issue. If you encounter any, feel free to add a fix through
a PR, or create a new issue ticket.

2. Use [labels](https://github.com/sugarlabs/musicblocks/labels) on
your issues and PRs.

3. Do not spam with lots of PRs with little changes.

4. If you are addressing a bulk change, divide your commits across
multiple PRs, and send them one at a time. The fewer the number of
files addressed per PR, the better.

5. Communicate effectively. Go straight to the point. You don't need
to address anyone using '_sir_'. Don't write unnecessary comments;
don't be over-apologetic. There is no superiority hierarchy. Every
single contribution is welcome, as long as it doesn't spam or distract
the flow.

6. Write useful, brief commit messages. Add commit descriptions if
necessary. PR name should speak about what it is addressing and not
the issue. In case a PR fixes an issue, use `fixes #ticketno` or
`closes #ticketno` in the PR's comment. Briefly explain what your PR
is doing.

7. Always test your changes extensively before creating a PR. There's
no sense in merging broken code. If a PR is a _work in progress
(WIP)_, convert it to draft. It'll let the maintainers know it isn't
ready for merging.

8. Read and revise the concepts about programming constructs you're
dealing with. You must be clear about the behavior of the language or
compiler/transpiler. See [JavaScript
docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript).

9. If you have a question, do a _web search_ first. If you don't find
any satisfactory answer, then ask it in a comment. If it is a general
question about Music Blocks, please use the new
[discussions](https://github.com/sugarlabs/musicblocks/discussions)
tab on top the the repository, or the _Sugar-dev Devel
<[sugar-devel@lists.sugarlabs.org](mailto:sugar-devel@lists.sugarlabs.org)>_
mailing list. Don't ask silly questions (unless you don't know it is
silly ;p) before searching it on the web.

10. Work on things that matter. Follow three milestones: `Port Ready`,
`Migration`, and `Future`.  Those tagged `Port Ready` are
priority. Those tagged with `Migration` will be taken care of during
or after the foundation rebuild. Feel free to participate in the
conversation, adding valuable comments. Those tagged with `Future`
need not be addressed presently.

_Please note there is no need to ask permission to work on an
issue. You should check for pull requests linked to an issue you are
addressing; if there are none, then assume nobody has done
anything. Begin to fix the problem, test, make your commits, push your
commits, then make a pull request. Mention an issue number in the pull
request, but not the commit message. These practices allow the
competition of ideas (Sugar Labs is a meritocracy)._

## <a name="MODIFYING_MUSIC_BLOCKS"></a>Modifying Music Blocks

The core functionality for Music Blocks resides in the [`js/`
directory](./js/). Individual modules are described in more detail in
[js/README.md](./js/README.md).

**NOTE:** As for any changes, please make a local copy by cloning this
[repository](https://github.com/sugarlabs/musicblocks.git). Make your
changes, test them, and only then make a pull request.

[Contributing
Code](https://github.com/sugarlabs/sugar-docs/blob/master/src/contributing.md)
provides a general overview of Sugar Lab's guidelines. See
[Contributing](#CONTRIBUTING) section for specific details about this
repository.

## <a name="REPORTING_BUGS"></a>Reporting Bugs

Bugs can be reported in the [issues
tab](https://github.com/sugarlabs/musicblocks/issues) of this
repository.

If possible, please include the browser _console log output_, and
_steps to reproduce_, when reporting bugs. To access the console, type
`Ctrl-Shift-J`/`F12` on most browsers. Alternately, _right click_ and
select `Inspect`. You may need to set the `Default levels` for the
console to `Verbose` in order to see all of the output, however, in
most cases that won't be required. In fact, it'll only clutter the
list, so select it only when required.

## <a name="CREDITS"></a>Credits

Music Blocks is a fork of [Turtle Blocks
JS](https://github.com/sugarlabs/turtleblocksjs) created by _Walter
Bender ([@walterbender](https://github.com/walterbender))_.

[_Devin Ulibarri_](http://www.devinulibarri.com/) has contributed
functional and user-interface designs. Many of his contributions were
inspired by the music education ideas, representations and practices
(e.g. aspects of matrix, musical cups) developed and published by
[_Larry Scripp_](http://www.larryscripp.net/) with whom _Devin_
studied at New England Conservatory and for whom he worked at Affron
Scripp & Associates, LLC, [Center for Music and the Arts in Education
(CMAIE)](http://centerformie.org/), and [Music in
Education](http://music-in-education.org/). Some of the initial
graphics were contributed by [_Chie
Yasuda_](http://www.chieyasuda.com).

Much of the initial coding specific to Music Blocks was done by _Yash
Khandelwal ([@khandelwalYash](https://github.com/khandelwalYash))_ as
part of Google Summer of Code (GSoC) 2015. _Hemant Kasat
([@hemantkasat](https://github.com/hemantkasat))_ contributed to
additional widgets as part of GSoC 2016. Additional contributions were
made by _Tayba Wasim ([@Tabs16](https://github.com/Tabs16))_, _Dinuka
Tharangi Jayaweera ([@Tharangi](https://github.com/Tharangi))_,
_Prachi Agrawal
([@prachiagrawal269](https://github.com/prachiagrawal269))_, _Cristina
Del Puerto ([@cristinadp](https://github.com/cristinadp))_, and
_Hrishi Patel ([@Hrishi1999](https://github.com/Hrishi1999))_ as part
of GSoC 2017. During GSoC 2018, _Riya Lohia
([@riyalohia](https://github.com/riyalohia))_ developed a Temperament
widget.  _Ritwik Abhishek ([@a-ritwik](https://github.com/a-ritwik))_
added a keyboard widget and a pitch-tracking widget. During GSoC 2019,
_Favor Kelvin ([@fakela](https://github.com/fakela))_ refactored much
of the code to use promises. During GSoC 2020, _Anindya Kundu
([@meganindya](https://github.com/meganindya))_ did a major
refactoring of the code base to support JavaScript export. _Aviral
Gangwar ([@aviral243](https://github.com/aviral243))_ enhanced the
internal representation of mode and key.  _Saksham Mrig
([@sksum](https://github.com/sksum))_ fixed 70+ bugs and added support
for pitch tracking and MIDI import.

Many students contributed to the project as part of Google Code-in
(2015&ndash;2019).  _Sam Parkinson
([@samdroid-apps](https://github.com/samdroid-apps))_ built the Planet
during GCI.  _Emily Ong ([@EmilyOng](https://github.com/EmilyOng))_
designed our mouse icon and _Euan Ong
([@eohomegrownapps](https://github.com/eohomegrownapps))_ redesigned
the Planet code as a series of GCI tasks.  _Austin George
([@aust-n](https://github.com/aust-n))_ refactored the toolbars as a
series of GCI tasks. _Bottersnike
([@Bottersnike](https://github.com/Bottersnike))_ redesigned the
widgets and the Block API, _Andrea Gonzales
([@AndreaGon](https://github.com/AndreaGon))_ made the widgets
responsive, _Marcus Chong ([@pidddgy](https://github.com/pidddgy))_
refactored the update code, resulting in an order-of-magnitude
improvement in CPU usage, and _Samyok Nepal
([@nepaltechguy2](https://github.com/nepaltechguy2))_ updated the
local storage mechanism to use localForage.

A full list of
[contributors](https://github.com/sugarlabs/musicblocks/graphs/contributors)
is available.

## <a name="MUSIC_BLOCKS_IN_JAPAN"></a>Music Blocks in Japan

[Gakken STEAM](https://gakken-steam.jp/music_blocks/)

Commit message:

tweak wording and add more details regarding the license

README.md, after:

<a href="https://github.com//sugarlabs/musicblocks/graphs/contributors" alt="Contributors">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/contributors/sugarlabs/musicblocks" />
</a>

<a href="#license" alt="License">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/license/sugarlabs/musicblocks" />
</a>

# Music Blocks

“_All musicians are subconsciously mathematicians._” — Monk

“_Music is a hidden arithmetic exercise of the soul, which does not
know that it is counting._” — Leibniz

Music Blocks is a _Visual Programming Language_ and collection of
_manipulative tools_ for exploring musical and mathematical concepts
in an integrative and fun way.

## Getting Started

Music Blocks is an interactive Web Application &mdash; the interaction
is done via basic mouse events like _click_, _right click_, _click and
drag_, etc. and keyboard events like _hotkey press_.  The application
is audio-visual; it produces graphics artwork and music. Here are a
couple of screenshots to give you an idea of how the application looks
like:

![alt tag](./screenshots/Screenshot-1.png)

![alt tag](./screenshots/Screenshot-2.png)

Visit the Music Blocks website for a hands on experience:
[https://musicblocks.sugarlabs.org](https://musicblocks.sugarlabs.org).

Some background on why we combine music and programming can be found
[here](./WhyMusicBlocks.md).

**Refer to the following sections to get familiar with this application:**

- [Running Music Blocks](#RUNNING_MUSIC_BLOCKS)
- [How to set up a local server](#HOW_TO_SET_UP_A_LOCAL_SERVER)
- [Using Music Blocks](#USING_MUSIC_BLOCKS)

If you are a developer (beginner, experienced, or pro), you are very
welcome to participate in the evolution of Music Blocks.

**Refer to the following sections to get an idea:**

- [Code of Conduct](#CODEOFCONDUCT)
- [Contributing](#CONTRIBUTING)
- [Modifying Music Blocks](#MODIFYING_MUSIC_BLOCKS)
- [Reporting Bugs](#REPORTING_BUGS)

**Refer to the following for more information regarding the evolution
  of this project:**

- [Credits](#CREDITS)
- [Music Blocks in Japan](#MUSIC_BLOCKS_IN_JAPAN)

## <a name="RUNNING_MUSIC_BLOCKS"></a>Running Music Blocks

Music Blocks is available under the _GNU Affero General Public License
(AGPL) v3.0_, a free, copyleft license.

Music Blocks is designed to run in a web browser. The ideal way to run
Music Blocks is to visit the URL
[_musicblocks.sugarlabs.org_](https://musicblocks.sugarlabs.org) in
your browser — _Google Chrome_ (or _Chromium_), _Microsoft Edge_
(_Chromium-based_), _Mozilla Firefox_, and _Opera_ work best.

To run from the latest master branch (experimental), visit
[_sugarlabs.github.io/musicblocks_](https://sugarlabs.github.io/musicblocks).

## <a name="HOW_TO_SET_UP_A_LOCAL_SERVER"></a>How to set up a _local server_

Music Blocks is written using native browser technologies. The bulk of
the functionality is in vanilla _JavaScript_. This means that most of
the functionality can be accessed by launching the
[index.html](./index.html) file in the browser using
`file:///absolute/path/to/index.html`.

However, using so, some functionality will not be available. On top of
that, some web browsers (e.g., Firefox v68) have restrictions that
prevent Music Blocks from running using `file:///`.  Therefore, it is
best to launch a _local web server_ from the directory of Music
Blocks.

1. [Download](https://github.com/sugarlabs/musicblocks/archive/master.zip)
Music Blocks, or clone (`https://github.com/sugarlabs/musicblocks.git`
for _HTTPS_, or `gh repo clone sugarlabs/musicblocks` for _GitHub
CLI_), on your local machine.

2. In a terminal, `cd` to the directory where you downloaded/cloned
Music Blocks, using `cd path/to/musicblocks/`.

3. If you do not have [_Python_](https://www.python.org) installed,
you'll need to install it.  You can test for Python in a terminal
using `python`. Type `exit()` to exit Python. (Note that on some older
Linux systems, the `python3` command is not bound to python. You may
need to perform a `sudo apt install python-is-python3` on Debian-like
distros, or equivalent on others.)

4. After cloning the musicblocks repository, run

    for _Linux_ and _macOS_:

    ```bash
    python -c \"import os, sys; os.system('python -m SimpleHTTPServer 3000 --bind 127.0.0.1') if sys.version_info.major==2 else os.system('python -m http.server 3000 --bind 127.0.0.1');
    ```

    for _Windows_:

    ```bash
    py -c \"import os, sys; os.system('py -m SimpleHTTPServer 3000') if sys.version_info.major==2 else os.system('py -m http.server 3000 --bind 127.0.0.1');
    ```

    If you have `npm` installed, simply run `npm run serve` for Linux
    and macOS, and `npm run winserve` for Windows.

    **NOTE:** _Make sure you can run either `python` or `py` from your
    terminal, to launch the Python prompt._

5. You should see a message `Serving HTTP on 127.0.0.1 port 3000
(http://127.0.0.1:3000/) ...` since the HTTP Server is set to start
listening on port 3000.

6. Open your favorite browser and visit `localhost:3000` or `127.0.0.1:3000`.

**NOTE:** _Use `ctrl + c` or `cmd + c` to quit the HTTP Server to avoid
`socket.error:[Errno 48]`_.

## <a name="USING_MUSIC_BLOCKS"></a>Using Music Blocks

Once Music Blocks is running, you'll want suggestions on how to use
it. Follow [Using Music Blocks](./documentation/README.md) and [Music
Blocks Guide](./guide/README.md).

Looking for a block? Find it in the
[Palette Tables](./guide/README.md#APPENDIX_1).

## <a name="CODEOFCONDUCT"></a>Code of Conduct

The Music Blocks project adheres to the [Sugar Labs Code of
Conduct](https://github.com/sugarlabs/sugar-docs/blob/master/src/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md)

## <a name="CONTRIBUTING"></a>Contributing

Please consider contributing to the project, with your ideas, your
music, your lesson plans, your artwork, and your code.

### Special Notes

Music Blocks is being built from the ground-up, to address several
architectural problems with this run. Since Music Blocks is a fork of
Turtle Blocks JS, musical functionality was added on top of it.
However, music is fundamental to Music Blocks. Besides, the Turtle
Blocks JS started initially with handful of features and was written
without a complex architecture. As Music Blocks got built on top of
that, it got incrementally complex, but the architecture remained
simple, thus resulting in a monolith. Also, the functionality is
tightly coupled with the interface and native client API (Web API).

Keeping these problems in mind, we have considered a foundational
rebuild that will address all these issues, whilst adding buffers for
future additions. We'll also be using a more elegant tech-stack to
develop and maintain this project given its scale. After the core is
built, we'll be porting features from this application to it.

Refer to the repository
[**sugarlabs/musicblocks-2**](https://github.com/sugarlabs/musicblocks-2)
for more information about the new project &mdash; _Music Blocks 2.0_.

### Tech Stack

Music Blocks is a Web Application and is written using browser
technologies &mdash; `HTML`, `CSS` (`SCSS`), `JavaScript`, `SVG`, etc.

If you're just getting started with development, you may refer to the
following resources:

- [HTML tutorial - w3schools.com](https://www.w3schools.com/html/default.asp)
- [HTML reference - MDN Web Docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML)
- [CSS tutorial - w3schools.com](https://www.w3schools.com/css/default.asp)
- [CSS reference - MDN Web Docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS)
- [JavaScript tutorial - w3schools.com](https://www.w3schools.com/js/default.asp)
- [JavaScript reference - MDN Web Docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript)

Programmers, please follow these general [guidelines for
contributions](https://github.com/sugarlabs/sugar-docs/blob/master/src/contributing.md).

### New Contributors

Use the
[discussions](https://github.com/sugarlabs/musicblocks/discussions)
tab at the top of the repository to:

- Ask questions you’re wondering about.
- Share ideas.
- Engage with other community members.

Feel free. But, please don't spam :p.

### Keep in Mind

1. Your contributions need not necessarily have to address any
discovered issue. If you encounter any, feel free to add a fix through
a PR, or create a new issue ticket.

2. Use [labels](https://github.com/sugarlabs/musicblocks/labels) on
your issues and PRs.

3. Do not spam with lots of PRs with little changes.

4. If you are addressing a bulk change, divide your commits across
multiple PRs, and send them one at a time. The fewer the number of
files addressed per PR, the better.

5. Communicate effectively. Go straight to the point. You don't need
to address anyone using '_sir_'. Don't write unnecessary comments;
don't be over-apologetic. There is no superiority hierarchy. Every
single contribution is welcome, as long as it doesn't spam or distract
the flow.

6. Write useful, brief commit messages. Add commit descriptions if
necessary. PR name should speak about what it is addressing and not
the issue. In case a PR fixes an issue, use `fixes #ticketno` or
`closes #ticketno` in the PR's comment. Briefly explain what your PR
is doing.

7. Always test your changes extensively before creating a PR. There's
no sense in merging broken code. If a PR is a _work in progress
(WIP)_, convert it to draft. It'll let the maintainers know it isn't
ready for merging.

8. Read and revise the concepts about programming constructs you're
dealing with. You must be clear about the behavior of the language or
compiler/transpiler. See [JavaScript
docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript).

9. If you have a question, do a _web search_ first. If you don't find
any satisfactory answer, then ask it in a comment. If it is a general
question about Music Blocks, please use the new
[discussions](https://github.com/sugarlabs/musicblocks/discussions)
tab on top the the repository, or the _Sugar-dev Devel
<[sugar-devel@lists.sugarlabs.org](mailto:sugar-devel@lists.sugarlabs.org)>_
mailing list. Don't ask silly questions (unless you don't know it is
silly ;p) before searching it on the web.

10. Work on things that matter. Follow three milestones: `Port Ready`,
`Migration`, and `Future`.  Those tagged `Port Ready` are
priority. Those tagged with `Migration` will be taken care of during
or after the foundation rebuild. Feel free to participate in the
conversation, adding valuable comments. Those tagged with `Future`
need not be addressed presently.

_Please note there is no need to ask permission to work on an
issue. You should check for pull requests linked to an issue you are
addressing; if there are none, then assume nobody has done
anything. Begin to fix the problem, test, make your commits, push your
commits, then make a pull request. Mention an issue number in the pull
request, but not the commit message. These practices allow the
competition of ideas (Sugar Labs is a meritocracy)._

## <a name="MODIFYING_MUSIC_BLOCKS"></a>Modifying Music Blocks

The core functionality for Music Blocks resides in the [`js/`
directory](./js/). Individual modules are described in more detail in
[js/README.md](./js/README.md).

**NOTE:** As for any changes, please make a local copy by cloning this
[repository](https://github.com/sugarlabs/musicblocks.git). Make your
changes, test them, and only then make a pull request.

[Contributing
Code](https://github.com/sugarlabs/sugar-docs/blob/master/src/contributing.md)
provides a general overview of Sugar Lab's guidelines. See
[Contributing](#CONTRIBUTING) section for specific details about this
repository.

## <a name="REPORTING_BUGS"></a>Reporting Bugs

Bugs can be reported in the [issues
tab](https://github.com/sugarlabs/musicblocks/issues) of this
repository.

If possible, please include the browser _console log output_, and
_steps to reproduce_, when reporting bugs. To access the console, type
`Ctrl-Shift-J`/`F12` on most browsers. Alternately, _right click_ and
select `Inspect`. You may need to set the `Default levels` for the
console to `Verbose` in order to see all of the output, however, in
most cases that won't be required. In fact, it'll only clutter the
list, so select it only when required.

## <a name="CREDITS"></a>Credits

Music Blocks is a fork of [Turtle Blocks
JS](https://github.com/sugarlabs/turtleblocksjs) created by _Walter
Bender ([@walterbender](https://github.com/walterbender))_.

[_Devin Ulibarri_](http://www.devinulibarri.com/) has contributed
functional and user-interface designs. Many of his contributions were
inspired by the music education ideas, representations and practices
(e.g. aspects of matrix, musical cups) developed and published by
[_Larry Scripp_](http://www.larryscripp.net/) with whom _Devin_
studied at New England Conservatory and for whom he worked at Affron
Scripp & Associates, LLC, [Center for Music and the Arts in Education
(CMAIE)](http://centerformie.org/), and [Music in
Education](http://music-in-education.org/). Some of the initial
graphics were contributed by [_Chie
Yasuda_](http://www.chieyasuda.com).

Much of the initial coding specific to Music Blocks was done by _Yash
Khandelwal ([@khandelwalYash](https://github.com/khandelwalYash))_ as
part of Google Summer of Code (GSoC) 2015. _Hemant Kasat
([@hemantkasat](https://github.com/hemantkasat))_ contributed to
additional widgets as part of GSoC 2016. Additional contributions were
made by _Tayba Wasim ([@Tabs16](https://github.com/Tabs16))_, _Dinuka
Tharangi Jayaweera ([@Tharangi](https://github.com/Tharangi))_,
_Prachi Agrawal
([@prachiagrawal269](https://github.com/prachiagrawal269))_, _Cristina
Del Puerto ([@cristinadp](https://github.com/cristinadp))_, and
_Hrishi Patel ([@Hrishi1999](https://github.com/Hrishi1999))_ as part
of GSoC 2017. During GSoC 2018, _Riya Lohia
([@riyalohia](https://github.com/riyalohia))_ developed a Temperament
widget.  _Ritwik Abhishek ([@a-ritwik](https://github.com/a-ritwik))_
added a keyboard widget and a pitch-tracking widget. During GSoC 2019,
_Favor Kelvin ([@fakela](https://github.com/fakela))_ refactored much
of the code to use promises. During GSoC 2020, _Anindya Kundu
([@meganindya](https://github.com/meganindya))_ did a major
refactoring of the code base to support JavaScript export. _Aviral
Gangwar ([@aviral243](https://github.com/aviral243))_ enhanced the
internal representation of mode and key.  _Saksham Mrig
([@sksum](https://github.com/sksum))_ fixed 70+ bugs and added support
for pitch tracking and MIDI import.

Many students contributed to the project as part of Google Code-in
(2015&ndash;2019).  _Sam Parkinson
([@samdroid-apps](https://github.com/samdroid-apps))_ built the Planet
during GCI.  _Emily Ong ([@EmilyOng](https://github.com/EmilyOng))_
designed our mouse icon and _Euan Ong
([@eohomegrownapps](https://github.com/eohomegrownapps))_ redesigned
the Planet code as a series of GCI tasks.  _Austin George
([@aust-n](https://github.com/aust-n))_ refactored the toolbars as a
series of GCI tasks. _Bottersnike
([@Bottersnike](https://github.com/Bottersnike))_ redesigned the
widgets and the Block API, _Andrea Gonzales
([@AndreaGon](https://github.com/AndreaGon))_ made the widgets
responsive, _Marcus Chong ([@pidddgy](https://github.com/pidddgy))_
refactored the update code, resulting in an order-of-magnitude
improvement in CPU usage, and _Samyok Nepal
([@nepaltechguy2](https://github.com/nepaltechguy2))_ updated the
local storage mechanism to use localForage.

A full list of
[contributors](https://github.com/sugarlabs/musicblocks/graphs/contributors)
is available.

## <a name="MUSIC_BLOCKS_IN_JAPAN"></a>Music Blocks in Japan

[Gakken STEAM](https://gakken-steam.jp/music_blocks/)

## License

Music Blocks is licensed under the
[AGPL](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/agpl-3.0.en.html), which means it
will always be free to copy, modify, and hopefully improve. We respect
your privacy: while Music Blocks stores your session information in
your browser's local storage, it does not and will never access these
data for purpoes other than to restore your session. Music Blocks will
never share these data with any third parties.

There is a Planet where you can share your projects with others and
remix projects created by other Music Blocks users. Use of the Planet
is anonymous and not required in order to enjoy Music Blocks.

Have fun, play hard, and learn.
