MUSIC BLOCKS
============

Music Blocks is a collection of manipulative tools for exploring
fundamental musical concepts in an integrative and fun way.

<img
src='https://rawgithub.com/walterbender/musicblocks/master/screenshots/Screenshot-1.png'</img>


Using Music Blocks
------------------

Music Blocks is designed to run in a browser. It is derived from
Turtle Blocks JS which can be found
[here](https://github.com/walterbender/turtleblocksjs). You can run
the software locally from the index.html file, from the
[github](http://walterbender.github.io/musicblocks/) repo, or by setting up a
local server.

If you want to run Music Blocks offline, download this repo and point
your browser to the index.html file found in the musicblocks directory
on your local file system.

See [Using Music
Blocks](http://github.com/walterbender/musicblocks/tree/master/documentation) and [Music Blocks Guide](http://github.com/walterbender/musicblocks/tree/master/guide)

Credits
-------

Music Blocks is a fork of TurtleArtJS created by Walter
Bender. (Turtle Blocks JS has many
[contributors](https://github.com/walterbender/turtleblocksjs/graphs/contributors)).

Devin Ulibarri has contributed functional and user-interface
designs. Many of his contributions were inspired by the music
education ideas, representations and practices (e.g. aspects of
matrix, musical cups) developed and published by Dr. Lawrence Scripp
with whom Devin studied at New England Conservatory and for whom he
worked at Affron Scripp & Associates, LLC.

[Larry Scripp](http://www.larryscripp.net/)

[Center for Music and the Arts in Education (CMAIE)](http://centerformie.org/)

[Music in Education](http://music-in-education.org/)

Some of the graphics were contributed by Chie Yasuda.

Much of the initial coding of the fork from Turtle Blocks was done by
Yash Khandelwal as part of Google Summer of Code (GSOC) 2015. Hemant
Kasat contributed to additional widgets as part of GSOC 2016.

Many students contributed to the code as part of Google Code-in (2015-16)

Reporting Bugs
--------------

Bugs can be reported in the [Sugar Labs bug
tracker](https://bugs.sugarlabs.org/newticket?component=Turtleart) or
in the [issues
section](https://github.com/walterbender/musicblocks/issues) of this
repository.
