examples/README.md, before:

# Music examples

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Hot-Cross-Buns-First-Form-Discovery-START.html | Rearrange the blocks to make variants of Hot Cross Buns |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | B, A, G | 34 | G4, 392Hz | B4, 494Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Frere-Jacques-first-form-discovery.html | Rearrange blocks to create variations of Frere Jacques |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Hot-Cross-Buns.html | An example of using graphics embedded inside of Note Value blocks to visualize beat. | Music, Examples | 3 | 0 | 0 | B, A, G | 340 | G4, 392Hz | G5, 784Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Mississippi-Hotdog.html | "Mississippi Hotdog": a simple example of a repeated phrase |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| NP | 32 | 0 | 0 | C, G, A, F, E, D | 48 | C4, 262Hz | A4, 441Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| interactive-scales.html | Interactive scales: while the cursor is in the top half of the screen, the pitch increases; while the cursor is in the bottom half of the screen, the pitch decreases. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Interactive, Math, Examples | 4 | 1 | 2 | A, B, C, D, E, F, G | 20 | A3, 221Hz | E5, 660Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| note-values.html| Example of varying note values. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 1 | 0 | 0 | G, R | 37 | G4, 392Hz | G4, 392Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| polyrhythms.html | Polyphonic drum rhythms |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | R | 80 | R, Hz | R, Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| rhythm-test.html | Variations of rhythm |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 3 | 0 | 0 | G, R, C, D, E, F, A, B | 196 | C4, 262Hz | A5, 881 Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| 12-Keys-Circles-and-Nth.html | Via n^th modal pitch and some fun calculations we can generate all 12 keys. The 12 spirals was not originally intended, but I have kept it as it is nice |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Art, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, D, E, F, G, A, B | 96 | C4, 262Hz | B5, 988Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| 12-bar-blues.html | The twelve-bar blues or blues changes is one of the most prominent chord progressions in popular music. The blues progression has a distinctive form in lyrics, phrase, chord structure, and duration. In its basic form, it is predominantly based on the I, IV, and V chords of a key. The blues can be played in any key. (Wikipedia) In this example, we vary the color based on pitch number and the pen width based on beat value. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Art, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, D, E, F, G, A, B | 96 | C4, 262Hz | B5, 988Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| fifths-and-sixths.html | Simple progression of fifths and sixths |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 24 | 0 | 0 | D, A, B, E, C, F, G | 48 | D3, 147H | F5, 699Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| hot-cross-buns-graphics.html | An example of using graphics embedded inside of Note Value **blocks** to visualize beat. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 3 | 0 | 0 | B, A, G | 17 | G4, 392Hz | B4, 494Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| scale-degree.html | Using scale degree to generate chromatic scales with varying note values. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples, Math | 2 | 0 | 0 | D, E, F, G, A, B, C | 63 | D4, 294Hz | G8, 6272Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| scales.html | Using the scalar **step** block to generate a scale. Try changing the key and mode. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, D, E, F, G, A, B | 15 | C4, 262Hz | C5, 524Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| swing.html | Simple swing rhythm with a bit of randomness(one of this or that) in the note selection |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | D, E, G, A, B | 28 | D4, 294Hz | 494Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| triads.html | A sequence of triads ranging from consonance to dissonance |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, D, G, E, A, B | 90 | C4, 262HZ | B4, 494Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Newton-color-model.html | Sir Isaac Newton designed a mapping between musical pitch and color. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Math, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, D, E, F, G, A, B | 8 | C4, 262Hz | C5, 524Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| ascending-notes-color-spiral.html | Mapping pitch into a spiral graphic |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Math, Example | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, D, E, F, G, A, B | 25 | C4, 262Hz | F7, 2794Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| silly-canons.html | An interactive exploration of canons based on Frere Jacques |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| drum-machine.html | Starting point for programming an interactive drum machine |

# Transcriptions

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Frere-Jacques.html | Frere Jacques |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Frere-Jacques-with-events.html | Frere Jacques canon triggered by broadcasting events |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Jeopardy-Theme.html | with artwork from the Simsons |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music | 5 | 0 | 0 | E, A, C, B, G, F, D, R | 69 | C3, 131Hz | C♯5, 555Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| la-bamba.html | La Bamba is a Mexican folk song, originally from the state of Veracruz, best known from a 1958 adaptation by Ritchie Valens. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 10 | 0 | 0 | C, E, G, F, A, D, B | 319 | G2, 98Hz | B6, 1976Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| modified-Bach.html | A short excerpt from Bach with two voices |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | B, D, C, R, A, G, E, F | 34 | E3, 165Hz | D4, 294Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| modified-Bach-2.html | Simple two-voice example from Bach |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | A, D, E, R, F, G, B, C | 34 | C♯4, 278Hz | B♭5, 933Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Old-MacDonald-had-a-farm.html | Old MacDonald had a Farm with sprites and lyrics |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Media, Examples | 6 | 0 | 0 | F, C, D, R, A, G | 167 | C4, 262Hz | A4, 441Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| chopsticks.html | "Chopsticks" is a simple, widely known waltz for the piano. Written in 1877, it is the only published piece[1] by the British composer Euphemia Allen. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | G, F, E, B, D, A, C | 196 | C4, 262Hz | C5, 524Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| crabcanon-plot.html | Musical Offering by JS Bach, featured in Gödel, Escher, Bach by Douglas Hofstader, is an example of a crab canon is an arrangement of two musical lines that are complementary and backward, similar to a palindrome. This version includes a note plotter that makes the palindromic nature of the music apparent. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 22 | 0 | 0 | A, C, E, F, G, R, D, B | 186 | E3, 165Hz | D5, 588Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| crabcanon.html | A crab canon is an arrangement of two musical lines that are complementary and backward. This is example from J. S. Bach, which uses the backward **block** in its implementation. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 22 | 0 | 0 | A, C, E, F, G, R, D, B | 186 | E3, 165Hz | D5, 588Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Shlomit.html | Duet for violins by the composer Luciano Berio |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 2 | 0 | 0 | R,D, A, B, E, C, G, F | 201 | R, NaHz | R, NaHz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| silent-night.html | "Silent Night" (German: Stille Nacht, heilige Nacht) is a popular Christmas carol, composed in 1818 by Franz Xaver Gruber |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 34 | 0 | 0 | G, A, E, D, B, C, F | 93 | G2, 98Hz | A4, 441Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| silent-night-plot.html | A two-part version of Silent Night (German: Stille Nacht, heilige Nacht), a popular Christmas carol, composed in 1818 by Franz Xaver Gruber. The two voices are plotted on a graph to reveal pitch and not duration. FIXME: Volume goes below zero. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 34 | 0 | 0 | G, A, E, D, B, C, F | 93 | G2, 98Hz | A4, 441Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| simple-crab-canon.html | A simple crab canon(two parts, one plying backward while the other plays forward) by Bach |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 12 | 0 | 0 | R, F, E, D, C, B, A, G | 20 | R, NaHz | R, NaHz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| twinkle-twinkle.html | Twinkle Twinkle Little Star composed from "chunks" of note. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, G, A, F, E, D | 42 | C4, 262Hz | A4, 441Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Holly-Jolly-Christmas.html | "A Holly Jolly Christmas" is a Christmas song written by Johnny Marks and most famously performed by Burl Ives. MB Project created by a student for Google Code-in. Great work! |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 25 | 0 | 0 | R, E, G, C, B, A, F, D | 179 | R, NaNHz | R, NaNHz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| All-You-Need-is-Love-example.html| Rearrange the blocks to reproduce All You Need is Love by the Beatles. Once you are done, try making your own variations. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Doraemon-theme.html | Doraemon's Song is the opening theme song for the Doraemon anime that aired from 1979 to 2005 on TV Asahi. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, B, A, G, R, D, F | 59 | C4, 262Hz | D6, 1175Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Linus-and-Lucy.html | "Linus and Lucy" is a popular jazz piano composition written by Vince Guaraldi, appearing in many of the Peanuts animated television specials. Named for the fictional siblings Linus and Lucy van Pelt, it was released in 1964 on the Vince Guaraldi Trio's album Jazz Impressions of a Boy Named Charlie Brown. (Wikipedia) |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 36 | 0 | 0 | C, G, A, D, F, R, E | 1047 | F2, 88Hz | C5, 524Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Romanian-folk-song.html | Romanian Folk Dance is a short piano piece composed by Béla Bartók. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Math | 1 | 0 | 0 | A, F, G, D, E, B, C | 356 | G4, 392Hz | A6, 1761Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Bach-tonal-inversion-contrapunctus-XI-a.html | The Art of Fugue is an incomplete work of unspecified instrumentation by Johann Sebastian Bach (1685-1750). |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Example | 0 | 0 | 0 | A, D, E, R, F, G, B, C | 34 | C♯4, 278Hz | B♭5, 933Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Bach-tonal-inversion-contrapunctus-XI-b.html | Another example from Bach. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Example | 0 | 0 | 0 | B, E, F, R, G, A, C | 17 | E3, 165Hz | C4, 262Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Bartok-fib-color.html | Fibonacci rhythm progression by Bartók, with added variations in timbre (cello and violin) and pitch |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Math, Art, Example | 7 | 0 | 0 | A, B, C, G, F, E, D | 59 | A3, 221Hz | C5, 524Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| ut-queant-laxis.html | A Gregorian chant. Also known as Hymnus in loannem by Horatian Sapphics |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, D, F, E, R, G, A | 52 | C4, 262Hz | A4, 441Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Minuet-in-Reverse | From Haydn's Symphony 47 |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| In-C.html | In C is a musical piece composed by Terry Riley in 1964 for an indefinite number of performers. |

# Games

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| musical-dimensions.html | Interactive game: Test your listening skills by finding cards that match in (or differ by) instrument, pitch and note value. |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Racko.html | Put the pitches into ascending order |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| deducto.html | Interactive game: Determine the hidden musical pattern. |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| mouse-trap.html | Interactive game: Catch the mice by following the musical apattern. |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| spiralaterals.html | Interacive game: Match the pattern of intervals as the mouse creates patterns |

# Misc.

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Music-Blocks-demo.html | An interactive tour of Music Blocks written in Music Blocks. (This is an example of self-modifying code.) |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| random-jazz-flute.html | A jazz progression that proceeds randomly |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| polygons.html | Regular polygons with embedded notes |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| nautilus.html | Recursive implemention of Fibonacci nautilus graphic and tone progression |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| harmony-in-C.html | Two-part harmony |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| scales-with-fifths.html | Cycle through scales and fifths |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| intervals-with-events.html | generate random intervals by clicking on the mouse |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| equal-temperament-calculation.html | Calculate an octave tuned to equal temperament by using 2^(1/12) |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Twinkle-Twinkle-with-Pythagorean-tuning.html | Listen to the difference tuning makes |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| el.html | Experimentation with the *One of this or that* block.

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Galton-music.html | Modeled after a Galton box, a Gaussian distribution of tones is generated. |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| record-player.html | Record and playback a sequence of notes on a "vinyl". |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| stocks.html | Generated from a Python script, this project is a musical representation of the price of a stock over time |

# Utilities

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| test-suite.html | Smoke test for many Music Blocks functions. |

Commit message:

fix read color regression and add worm game to examples

examples/README.md, after:

# Music examples

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Hot-Cross-Buns-First-Form-Discovery-START.html | Rearrange the blocks to make variants of Hot Cross Buns |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | B, A, G | 34 | G4, 392Hz | B4, 494Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Frere-Jacques-first-form-discovery.html | Rearrange blocks to create variations of Frere Jacques |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Hot-Cross-Buns.html | An example of using graphics embedded inside of Note Value blocks to visualize beat. | Music, Examples | 3 | 0 | 0 | B, A, G | 340 | G4, 392Hz | G5, 784Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Mississippi-Hotdog.html | "Mississippi Hotdog": a simple example of a repeated phrase |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| NP | 32 | 0 | 0 | C, G, A, F, E, D | 48 | C4, 262Hz | A4, 441Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| interactive-scales.html | Interactive scales: while the cursor is in the top half of the screen, the pitch increases; while the cursor is in the bottom half of the screen, the pitch decreases. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Interactive, Math, Examples | 4 | 1 | 2 | A, B, C, D, E, F, G | 20 | A3, 221Hz | E5, 660Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| note-values.html| Example of varying note values. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 1 | 0 | 0 | G, R | 37 | G4, 392Hz | G4, 392Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| polyrhythms.html | Polyphonic drum rhythms |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | R | 80 | R, Hz | R, Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| rhythm-test.html | Variations of rhythm |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 3 | 0 | 0 | G, R, C, D, E, F, A, B | 196 | C4, 262Hz | A5, 881 Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| 12-Keys-Circles-and-Nth.html | Via n^th modal pitch and some fun calculations we can generate all 12 keys. The 12 spirals was not originally intended, but I have kept it as it is nice |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Art, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, D, E, F, G, A, B | 96 | C4, 262Hz | B5, 988Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| 12-bar-blues.html | The twelve-bar blues or blues changes is one of the most prominent chord progressions in popular music. The blues progression has a distinctive form in lyrics, phrase, chord structure, and duration. In its basic form, it is predominantly based on the I, IV, and V chords of a key. The blues can be played in any key. (Wikipedia) In this example, we vary the color based on pitch number and the pen width based on beat value. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Art, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, D, E, F, G, A, B | 96 | C4, 262Hz | B5, 988Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| fifths-and-sixths.html | Simple progression of fifths and sixths |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 24 | 0 | 0 | D, A, B, E, C, F, G | 48 | D3, 147H | F5, 699Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| hot-cross-buns-graphics.html | An example of using graphics embedded inside of Note Value **blocks** to visualize beat. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 3 | 0 | 0 | B, A, G | 17 | G4, 392Hz | B4, 494Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| scale-degree.html | Using scale degree to generate chromatic scales with varying note values. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples, Math | 2 | 0 | 0 | D, E, F, G, A, B, C | 63 | D4, 294Hz | G8, 6272Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| scales.html | Using the scalar **step** block to generate a scale. Try changing the key and mode. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, D, E, F, G, A, B | 15 | C4, 262Hz | C5, 524Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| swing.html | Simple swing rhythm with a bit of randomness(one of this or that) in the note selection |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | D, E, G, A, B | 28 | D4, 294Hz | 494Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| triads.html | A sequence of triads ranging from consonance to dissonance |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, D, G, E, A, B | 90 | C4, 262HZ | B4, 494Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Newton-color-model.html | Sir Isaac Newton designed a mapping between musical pitch and color. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Math, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, D, E, F, G, A, B | 8 | C4, 262Hz | C5, 524Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| ascending-notes-color-spiral.html | Mapping pitch into a spiral graphic |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Math, Example | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, D, E, F, G, A, B | 25 | C4, 262Hz | F7, 2794Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| silly-canons.html | An interactive exploration of canons based on Frere Jacques |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| drum-machine.html | Starting point for programming an interactive drum machine |

# Transcriptions

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Frere-Jacques.html | Frere Jacques |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Frere-Jacques-with-events.html | Frere Jacques canon triggered by broadcasting events |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Jeopardy-Theme.html | with artwork from the Simsons |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music | 5 | 0 | 0 | E, A, C, B, G, F, D, R | 69 | C3, 131Hz | C♯5, 555Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| la-bamba.html | La Bamba is a Mexican folk song, originally from the state of Veracruz, best known from a 1958 adaptation by Ritchie Valens. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 10 | 0 | 0 | C, E, G, F, A, D, B | 319 | G2, 98Hz | B6, 1976Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| modified-Bach.html | A short excerpt from Bach with two voices |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | B, D, C, R, A, G, E, F | 34 | E3, 165Hz | D4, 294Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| modified-Bach-2.html | Simple two-voice example from Bach |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | A, D, E, R, F, G, B, C | 34 | C♯4, 278Hz | B♭5, 933Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Old-MacDonald-had-a-farm.html | Old MacDonald had a Farm with sprites and lyrics |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Media, Examples | 6 | 0 | 0 | F, C, D, R, A, G | 167 | C4, 262Hz | A4, 441Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| chopsticks.html | "Chopsticks" is a simple, widely known waltz for the piano. Written in 1877, it is the only published piece[1] by the British composer Euphemia Allen. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | G, F, E, B, D, A, C | 196 | C4, 262Hz | C5, 524Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| crabcanon-plot.html | Musical Offering by JS Bach, featured in Gödel, Escher, Bach by Douglas Hofstader, is an example of a crab canon is an arrangement of two musical lines that are complementary and backward, similar to a palindrome. This version includes a note plotter that makes the palindromic nature of the music apparent. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 22 | 0 | 0 | A, C, E, F, G, R, D, B | 186 | E3, 165Hz | D5, 588Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| crabcanon.html | A crab canon is an arrangement of two musical lines that are complementary and backward. This is example from J. S. Bach, which uses the backward **block** in its implementation. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 22 | 0 | 0 | A, C, E, F, G, R, D, B | 186 | E3, 165Hz | D5, 588Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Shlomit.html | Duet for violins by the composer Luciano Berio |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 2 | 0 | 0 | R,D, A, B, E, C, G, F | 201 | R, NaHz | R, NaHz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| silent-night.html | "Silent Night" (German: Stille Nacht, heilige Nacht) is a popular Christmas carol, composed in 1818 by Franz Xaver Gruber |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 34 | 0 | 0 | G, A, E, D, B, C, F | 93 | G2, 98Hz | A4, 441Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| silent-night-plot.html | A two-part version of Silent Night (German: Stille Nacht, heilige Nacht), a popular Christmas carol, composed in 1818 by Franz Xaver Gruber. The two voices are plotted on a graph to reveal pitch and not duration. FIXME: Volume goes below zero. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 34 | 0 | 0 | G, A, E, D, B, C, F | 93 | G2, 98Hz | A4, 441Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| simple-crab-canon.html | A simple crab canon(two parts, one plying backward while the other plays forward) by Bach |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 12 | 0 | 0 | R, F, E, D, C, B, A, G | 20 | R, NaHz | R, NaHz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| twinkle-twinkle.html | Twinkle Twinkle Little Star composed from "chunks" of note. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, G, A, F, E, D | 42 | C4, 262Hz | A4, 441Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Holly-Jolly-Christmas.html | "A Holly Jolly Christmas" is a Christmas song written by Johnny Marks and most famously performed by Burl Ives. MB Project created by a student for Google Code-in. Great work! |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 25 | 0 | 0 | R, E, G, C, B, A, F, D | 179 | R, NaNHz | R, NaNHz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| All-You-Need-is-Love-example.html| Rearrange the blocks to reproduce All You Need is Love by the Beatles. Once you are done, try making your own variations. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Doraemon-theme.html | Doraemon's Song is the opening theme song for the Doraemon anime that aired from 1979 to 2005 on TV Asahi. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, B, A, G, R, D, F | 59 | C4, 262Hz | D6, 1175Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Linus-and-Lucy.html | "Linus and Lucy" is a popular jazz piano composition written by Vince Guaraldi, appearing in many of the Peanuts animated television specials. Named for the fictional siblings Linus and Lucy van Pelt, it was released in 1964 on the Vince Guaraldi Trio's album Jazz Impressions of a Boy Named Charlie Brown. (Wikipedia) |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Examples | 36 | 0 | 0 | C, G, A, D, F, R, E | 1047 | F2, 88Hz | C5, 524Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Romanian-folk-song.html | Romanian Folk Dance is a short piano piece composed by Béla Bartók. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Math | 1 | 0 | 0 | A, F, G, D, E, B, C | 356 | G4, 392Hz | A6, 1761Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Bach-tonal-inversion-contrapunctus-XI-a.html | The Art of Fugue is an incomplete work of unspecified instrumentation by Johann Sebastian Bach (1685-1750). |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Example | 0 | 0 | 0 | A, D, E, R, F, G, B, C | 34 | C♯4, 278Hz | B♭5, 933Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Bach-tonal-inversion-contrapunctus-XI-b.html | Another example from Bach. |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Example | 0 | 0 | 0 | B, E, F, R, G, A, C | 17 | E3, 165Hz | C4, 262Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Bartok-fib-color.html | Fibonacci rhythm progression by Bartók, with added variations in timbre (cello and violin) and pitch |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music, Math, Art, Example | 7 | 0 | 0 | A, B, C, G, F, E, D | 59 | A3, 221Hz | C5, 524Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| ut-queant-laxis.html | A Gregorian chant. Also known as Hymnus in loannem by Horatian Sapphics |

| Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Music | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, D, F, E, R, G, A | 52 | C4, 262Hz | A4, 441Hz |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Minuet-in-Reverse | From Haydn's Symphony 47 |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| In-C.html | In C is a musical piece composed by Terry Riley in 1964 for an indefinite number of performers. |

# Games

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| musical-dimensions.html | Interactive game: Test your listening skills by finding cards that match in (or differ by) instrument, pitch and note value. |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Racko.html | Put the pitches into ascending order |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| worm-game.html | Use the mouse button to steer away from the line. |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| deducto.html | Interactive game: Determine the hidden musical pattern. |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| mouse-trap.html | Interactive game: Catch the mice by following the musical apattern. |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| spiralaterals.html | Interacive game: Match the pattern of intervals as the mouse creates patterns |

# Misc.

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Music-Blocks-demo.html | An interactive tour of Music Blocks written in Music Blocks. (This is an example of self-modifying code.) |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| random-jazz-flute.html | A jazz progression that proceeds randomly |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| polygons.html | Regular polygons with embedded notes |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| nautilus.html | Recursive implemention of Fibonacci nautilus graphic and tone progression |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| harmony-in-C.html | Two-part harmony |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| scales-with-fifths.html | Cycle through scales and fifths |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| intervals-with-events.html | generate random intervals by clicking on the mouse |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| equal-temperament-calculation.html | Calculate an octave tuned to equal temperament by using 2^(1/12) |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Twinkle-Twinkle-with-Pythagorean-tuning.html | Listen to the difference tuning makes |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| el.html | Experimentation with the *One of this or that* block.

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Galton-music.html | Modeled after a Galton box, a Gaussian distribution of tones is generated. |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| record-player.html | Record and playback a sequence of notes on a "vinyl". |

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| stocks.html | Generated from a Python script, this project is a musical representation of the price of a stock over time |

# Utilities

| Example | Description |
| --- | --- |
| test-suite.html | Smoke test for many Music Blocks functions. |
