Example | Description | Tags | Duples | Triplets | Quintuplets | Pitch Names | Number of Notes | Lowest Note | Highest Note | Rests Used | Ornaments used
:---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---:
12-Keys-Circles-and-Nth.html | Via n^th modal pitch and some fun calculations we can generate all 12 keys. The 12 spirals was not originally intended, but I have kept it as it is nice | Music, Art, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, D, E, F, G, A, B | 96 | C4, 262Hz | B5, 988Hz | 0 | 0
12-bar-blues.html | The twelve-bar blues or blues changes is one of the most prominent chord progressions in popular music. The blues progression has a distinctive form in lyrics, phrase, chord structure, and duration. In its basic form, it is predominantly based on the I, IV, and V chords of a key. The blues can be played in any key. (Wikipedia) In this example, we vary the color based on pitch number and the pen width based on beat value. | Music, Art, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, D, E, F, G, A, B | 96 | C4, 262Hz | B5, 988Hz | 0 | 0
chopsticks.html | "Chopsticks" is a simple, widely known waltz for the piano. Written in 1877, it is the only published piece[1] by the British composer Euphemia Allen. | Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | G, F, E, B, D, A, C | 196 | C4, 262Hz | C5, 524Hz | 0 | 0
crabcanon-plot.html | Musical Offering by JS Bach, featured in Gödel, Escher, Bach by Douglas Hofstader, is an example of a crab canon is an arrangement of two musical lines that are complementary and backward, similar to a palindrome. This version includes a note plotter that makes the palindromic nature of the music apparent. | Music, Examples | 22 | 0 | 0 | A, C, E, F, G, R, D, B | 186 | E3, 165Hz | D5, 588Hz | 1 | 0
crabcanon.html | A crab canon is an arrangement of two musical lines that are complementary and backward. This is example from J. S. Bach, which uses the backward **block** in its implementation. | Music, Examples | 22 | 0 | 0 | A, C, E, F, G, R, D, B | 186 | E3, 165Hz | D5, 588Hz | 1 | 0
fifths-and-sixths.html | Simple progression of fifths and sixths | Music, Examples | 24 | 0 | 0 | D, A, B, E, C, F, G | 48 | D3, 147H | F5, 699Hz | 0 | 0
hot-cross-buns-graphics.html | An example of using graphics embedded inside of Note Value **blocks** to visualize beat. | Music, Examples | 3 | 0 | 0 | B, A, G | 17 | G4, 392Hz | B4, 494Hz | 0 | 0
scale-degree.tb | Using scale degree to generate chromatic scales with varying note values. | Music, Examples, Math | 2 | 0 | 0 | D, E, F, G, A, B, C | 63 | D4, 294Hz | G8, 6272Hz | 0 | 0
scales.html | Using the scalar **step** block to generate a scale. Try changing the key and mode. | Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, D, E, F, G, A, B | 15 | C4, 262Hz | C5, 524Hz | 0 | 0
shlomit-I-berio.tb | Duet by the composer Luciano Berio | Music, Examples | 2 | 0 | 0 | R,D, A, B, E, C, G, F | 201 | R, NaHz | R, NaHz | 1 | 0
silent-night-plot.tb | A two-part version of Silent Night (German: Stille Nacht, heilige Nacht), a popular Christmas carol, composed in 1818 by Franz Xaver Gruber. The two voices are plotted on a graph to reveal pitch and not duration. FIXME: Volume goes below zero. | Music, Examples | 34 | 0 | 0 | G, A, E, D, B, C, F | 93 | G2, 98Hz | A4, 441Hz | 0 | 0
silent-night.tb | "Silent Night" (German: Stille Nacht, heilige Nacht) is a popular Christmas carol, composed in 1818 by Franz Xaver Gruber | Music, Examples | 34 | 0 | 0 | G, A, E, D, B, C, F | 93 | G2, 98Hz | A4, 441Hz | 0 | 0
simple-crab-canon.tb | A simple crab canon(two parts, one plying backward while the other plays forward) by Bach | Music, Examples | 12 | 0 | 0 | R, F, E, D, C, B, A, G | 20 | R, NaHz | R, NaHz | 1 | 0
swing.html | Simple swing rhythm with a bit of randomness(one of this or that) in the note selection | Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | D, E, G, A, B | 28 | D4, 294Hz | 494Hz | 0 | 0
triads.tb | A sequence of triads ranging from consonance to dissonance | Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, D, G, E, A, B | 90 | C4, 262HZ | B4, 494Hz | 0 | 0
twinkle-twinkle.html | Twinkle Twinkle Little Star composed from "chunks" of note. | Music, Examples | 0 | 0 | 0 | C, G, A, F, E, D | 42 | C4, 262Hz | A4, 441Hz | 0 | 0
